### Publicly available data provide evidence against NR1H3 R415Q causing multiple sclerosis

Eric Vallabh Minikel<sup>1,2,3</sup>

1. Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
2. Analytical and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital
3. Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School

eminikel@broadinstitute.org

Wang et al. report that an NR1H3 variant, rs61731956, encoding an R415Q substitution, causes a novel familial form of multiple sclerosis (MS) (Wang et al., 2016). This claim of pathogenicity rests on imperfect segregation with disease in two pedigrees, and is at odds with publicly available data from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) [[Exome Aggregation Consortium 2016]].

ExAC is a reference database of genetic variation among 60,706 ancestrally diverse individuals, assembled from multiple international consortia and made publicly available online ([http://exac.broadinstitute.org](http://exac.broadinstitute.org)) since October 2014. By providing population allele frequency information, it has enabled reclassification of over 150 reportedly pathogenic variants as benign [[Exome Aggregation Consortium 2016]], has allowed candidate variants to be ruled in or out as potentially disease-causing [[Mencacci 2016], [Watts 2015], [Weren 2015]], has permitted re-evaluation of the interpretability of rare variants in specific disease genes [[Walsh 2016]] and estimation of the penetrance of individual rare disease variants [[Minikel 2016]], and has been used to demonstrate enrichment of pathogenic variants in cases over population controls [[Singh 2016]]. 

As the authors note, the NR1H3 R415Q variant was found in 21 ExAC individuals [[ExAC variant 11:47290147 G / A]]. These 21 individuals are all of non-Finnish European ancestry, with 66,738 non-Finnish European chromosomes having genotype calls for this variant, for an allele frequency of 0.031% in this population -- within the range reported for different European populations by Cotsapas et al. While this genetic variant is not common, it is nevertheless too frequent to be causal for a novel familial form of multiple sclerosis.

Enrichment in cases over controls is one important criterion for establishing the causality of sequence variants for genetic disease [[MacArthur 2014], [Richards 2015]]. The authors identified the NR1H3 R415Q variant in one family and subsequently found it in 1 out of 2053 individuals in a multiple sclerosis case series, for an allele frequency of 0.024%, or 0.049% if the proband from the original family is included. The ancestry distribution of this case series is not stated by Wang et al., but the series was collected in Canada and appears to be of predominantly European ancestry [[Sadovnick 1998], [Traboulsee 2014]], enabling a rough comparison to the ExAC non-Finnish Europeans. Even if two individuals with this variant are included in the case series, the variant is not significantly enriched in cases over ExAC population controls (P = .39). 

Variants that cause Mendelian disease, even with incomplete penetrance, should be dramatically enriched in cases over controls. A systematic review found best estimates of lifetime risk of MS to be 0.25% for women and 0.14% for men [[Alonso & Hernan 2008]]. A 0.25% lifetime risk means that a woman's odds of developing MS are 1:399. Thus, a genetic variant that conferred even 50% lifetime risk (50/50 odds) of developing MS would have an odds ratio of 399. Such a genetic variant would therefore be expected to be enriched to a similar degree – by a few hundred fold – in MS cases compared to controls. Phrased differently, if NR1H3 R415Q has an allele frequency of 0.031% (0.06% of people are heterozygotes) and causes a 50% lifetime risk of MS, then this variant alone would result in 0.03% of the population developing MS. Comparison of this figure to a total of 0.25% of women and 0.14% of men developing MS (Alonso and Hernán, 2008) would imply that NR1H3 R415Q should be found in ~12-21% of all individuals with MS, rather than <0.1% as seen in the reported case series. 

ExAC data do not prove that NR1H3 R415Q lacks any association at all to increased MS risk, but they do put limits on the potential penetrance of this variant. The lifetime risk conferred by disease-associated variants can be estimated using case and control allele frequencies plus an estimate of baseline disease risk [[Kirov 2014], [Minikel 2016]]. Assuming 2 alleles in 2053 cases and using the lifetime risk figures noted above, the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval of penetrance for R415Q can be estimated at 2.2% for women and 1.2% for men, indicating that even if this variant is disease-associated, individuals harboring the variant would have a lifetime risk of developing MS no higher than a few percent.

As with any large-scale resource, there are some caveats that users should consider when leveraging ExAC data for variant interpretation, but none of these preclude the application of ExAC in this instance. Individuals in ExAC are not necessarily disease-free – approximately half were ascertained for adult-onset diseases such as type 2 diabetes and schizophrenia – however, none of the ExAC cohorts has been ascertained for MS. 1,675 (2.8%) of individuals in ExAC were ascertained as cases or controls for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), but the degree of genetic correlation and possible co-morbidity between IBD and MS [[Cotsapas 2011], [Nielsen 2008], [Ramagopalan 2007], [Sadovnick 1989]] is not sufficient to result in overall enrichment of ExAC for MS cases to any appreciable extent. Despite extensive quality control measures, ExAC still contains some genotyping errors [[Rodan 2016]], but we estimate a false discovery rate of <0.2% for single nucleotide variants [[Exome Aggregation Consortium 2016]], and raw read visualizations allow users to personally inspect variant quality, revealing that NR1H3 R415Q genotype calls are indeed of high quality. Finally, many benign variants are very rare, so allele frequency data cannot refute all erroneous claims of pathogenicity, and ExAC is therefore no substitute for the observance of strict statistical thresholds, such as LOD ≥ 3.0 for linkage studies [[Lander & Kruglyak 1995]], which was not met in the segregation analysis reported by Wang et al. Notwithstanding all of these limitations, ExAC provides a valuable resource for human genetics, and for this variant it provides information sufficient to effectively rule out causality for a familial form of MS.

Comparison of large case-control series, sequenced or genotyped using the same technology, and employing appropriate controls for population stratification, is the best way to evaluate whether candidate disease-causing variants are enriched in cases. Such datasets do not exist for all diseases, however, nor do all investigators have access to such series where they do exist. ExAC data provide a publicly available resource that anyone can use to evaluate the plausibility of putative Mendelian disease variants, and it is critical that authors and reviewers carefully consider such resources, and perform rigorous and quantitative assessments, when evaluating claims of variant pathogenicity.

#### Acknowledgments

*The R source code for calculations described here is publicly available at [https://github.com/ericminikel/nr1h3](https://github.com/ericminikel/nr1h3). EVM is supported by the National Institutes of Health under a Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award (NRSA) NIH Individual Predoctoral Fellowship (F31) (award AI122592-01A1), and thanks Daniel MacArthur for discussions.*

#### References


1.	Alonso, A., Hernán, M.A., 2008. Temporal trends in the incidence of multiple sclerosis: a systematic review. Neurology 71, 129–135. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000316802.35974.34
2.	Cotsapas, C., Voight, B.F., Rossin, E., Lage, K., Neale, B.M., Wallace, C., Abecasis, G.R., Barrett, J.C., Behrens, T., Cho, J., De Jager, P.L., Elder, J.T., Graham, R.R., Gregersen, P., Klareskog, L., Siminovitch, K.A., van Heel, D.A., Wijmenga, C., Worthington, J., Todd, J.A., Hafler, D.A., Rich, S.S., Daly, M.J., FOCiS Network of Consortia, 2011. Pervasive sharing of genetic effects in autoimmune disease. PLoS Genet. 7, e1002254. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002254
3.	ExAC variant 11:47290147 G / A [WWW Document], 2014. URL http://exac.broadinstitute.org/variant/11-47290147-G-A (accessed 6.30.16).
4.	Exome Aggregation Consortium, Lek, M., Karczewski, K., Minikel, E., Samocha, K., Banks, E., Fennell, T., O’Donnell-Luria, A., Ware, J., Hill, A., Cummings, B., Tukiainen, T., Birnbaum, D., Kosmicki, J., Duncan, L., Estrada, K., Zhao, F., Zou, J., Pierce-Hoffman, E., Cooper, D., DePristo, M., Do, R., Flannick, J., Fromer, M., Gauthier, L., Goldstein, J., Gupta, N., Howrigan, D., Kiezun, A., Kurki, M., Moonshine, A.L., Natarajan, P., Orozco, L., Peloso, G., Poplin, R., Rivas, M., Ruano-Rubio, V., Ruderfer, D., Shakir, K., Stenson, P., Stevens, C., Thomas, B., Tiao, G., Tusie-Luna, M., Weisburd, B., Won, H.-H., Yu, D., Altshuler, D., Ardissino, D., Boehnke, M., Danesh, J., Roberto, E., Florez, J., Gabriel, S., Getz, G., Hultman, C., Kathiresan, S., Laakso, M., McCarroll, S., McCarthy, M., McGovern, D., McPherson, R., Neale, B., Palotie, A., Purcell, S., Saleheen, D., Scharf, J., Sklar, P., Patrick, S., Tuomilehto, J., Watkins, H., Wilson, J., Daly, M., MacArthur, D., In press. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. Nature. doi:10.1101/030338
5.	Kirov, G., Rees, E., Walters, J.T.R., Escott-Price, V., Georgieva, L., Richards, A.L., Chambert, K.D., Davies, G., Legge, S.E., Moran, J.L., McCarroll, S.A., O’Donovan, M.C., Owen, M.J., 2014. The penetrance of copy number variations for schizophrenia and developmental delay. Biol. Psychiatry 75, 378–385. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.07.022
6.	Lander, E., Kruglyak, L., 1995. Genetic dissection of complex traits: guidelines for interpreting and reporting linkage results. Nat. Genet. 11, 241–247. doi:10.1038/ng1195-241
7.	MacArthur, D.G., Manolio, T.A., Dimmock, D.P., Rehm, H.L., Shendure, J., Abecasis, G.R., Adams, D.R., Altman, R.B., Antonarakis, S.E., Ashley, E.A., Barrett, J.C., Biesecker, L.G., Conrad, D.F., Cooper, G.M., Cox, N.J., Daly, M.J., Gerstein, M.B., Goldstein, D.B., Hirschhorn, J.N., Leal, S.M., Pennacchio, L.A., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., Sunyaev, S.R., Valle, D., Voight, B.F., Winckler, W., Gunter, C., 2014. Guidelines for investigating causality of sequence variants in human disease. Nature 508, 469–476. doi:10.1038/nature13127
8.	Mencacci, N.E., Kamsteeg, E.-J., Nakashima, K., R’Bibo, L., Lynch, D.S., Balint, B., Willemsen, M.A.A.P., Adams, M.E., Wiethoff, S., Suzuki, K., Davies, C.H., Ng, J., Meyer, E., Veneziano, L., Giunti, P., Hughes, D., Raymond, F.L., Carecchio, M., Zorzi, G., Nardocci, N., Barzaghi, C., Garavaglia, B., Salpietro, V., Hardy, J., Pittman, A.M., Houlden, H., Kurian, M.A., Kimura, H., Vissers, L.E.L.M., Wood, N.W., Bhatia, K.P., 2016. De Novo Mutations in PDE10A Cause Childhood-Onset Chorea with Bilateral Striatal Lesions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 98, 763–771. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.02.015
9.	Minikel, E.V., Vallabh, S.M., Lek, M., Estrada, K., Samocha, K.E., Sathirapongsasuti, J.F., McLean, C.Y., Tung, J.Y., Yu, L.P.C., Gambetti, P., Blevins, J., Zhang, S., Cohen, Y., Chen, W., Yamada, M., Hamaguchi, T., Sanjo, N., Mizusawa, H., Nakamura, Y., Kitamoto, T., Collins, S.J., Boyd, A., Will, R.G., Knight, R., Ponto, C., Zerr, I., Kraus, T.F.J., Eigenbrod, S., Giese, A., Calero, M., de Pedro-Cuesta, J., Haïk, S., Laplanche, J.-L., Bouaziz-Amar, E., Brandel, J.-P., Capellari, S., Parchi, P., Poleggi, A., Ladogana, A., O’Donnell-Luria, A.H., Karczewski, K.J., Marshall, J.L., Boehnke, M., Laakso, M., Mohlke, K.L., Kähler, A., Chambert, K., McCarroll, S., Sullivan, P.F., Hultman, C.M., Purcell, S.M., Sklar, P., van der Lee, S.J., Rozemuller, A., Jansen, C., Hofman, A., Kraaij, R., van Rooij, J.G.J., Ikram, M.A., Uitterlinden, A.G., van Duijn, C.M., Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), Daly, M.J., MacArthur, D.G., 2016. Quantifying prion disease penetrance using large population control cohorts. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 322ra9. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aad5169
10.	Nielsen, N.M., Frisch, M., Rostgaard, K., Wohlfahrt, J., Hjalgrim, H., Koch-Henriksen, N., Melbye, M., Westergaard, T., 2008. Autoimmune diseases in patients with multiple sclerosis and their first-degree relatives: a nationwide cohort study in Denmark. Mult. Scler. Houndmills Basingstoke Engl. 14, 823–829. doi:10.1177/1352458508088936
11.	Ramagopalan, S.V., Dyment, D.A., Valdar, W., Herrera, B.M., Criscuoli, M., Yee, I.M.L., Sadovnick, A.D., Ebers, G.C., Canadian Collaborative Study Group, 2007. Autoimmune disease in families with multiple sclerosis: a population-based study. Lancet Neurol. 6, 604–610. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70132-1
12.	Richards, S., Aziz, N., Bale, S., Bick, D., Das, S., Gastier-Foster, J., Grody, W.W., Hegde, M., Lyon, E., Spector, E., Voelkerding, K., Rehm, H.L., ACMG Laboratory Quality Assurance Committee, 2015. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. Off. J. Am. Coll. Med. Genet. 17, 405–424. doi:10.1038/gim.2015.30
13.	Rodan, L.H., Cohen, J., Fatemi, A., Gillis, T., Lucente, D., Gusella, J., Picker, J.D., 2016. A novel neurodevelopmental disorder associated with compound heterozygous variants in the huntingtin gene. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. EJHG. doi:10.1038/ejhg.2016.74
14.	Sadovnick, A.D., Paty, D.W., Yannakoulias, G., 1989. Concurrence of multiple sclerosis and inflammatory bowel disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 321, 762–763.
15.	Sadovnick, A.D., Risch, N.J., Ebers, G.C., 1998. Canadian collaborative project on genetic susceptibility to MS, phase 2: rationale and method. Canadian Collaborative Study Group. Can. J. Neurol. Sci. J. Can. Sci. Neurol. 25, 216–221.
16.	Singh, T., Kurki, M.I., Curtis, D., Purcell, S.M., Crooks, L., McRae, J., Suvisaari, J., Chheda, H., Blackwood, D., Breen, G., Pietiläinen, O., Gerety, S.S., Ayub, M., Blyth, M., Cole, T., Collier, D., Coomber, E.L., Craddock, N., Daly, M.J., Danesh, J., DiForti, M., Foster, A., Freimer, N.B., Geschwind, D., Johnstone, M., Joss, S., Kirov, G., Körkkö, J., Kuismin, O., Holmans, P., Hultman, C.M., Iyegbe, C., Lönnqvist, J., Männikkö, M., McCarroll, S.A., McGuffin, P., McIntosh, A.M., McQuillin, A., Moilanen, J.S., Moore, C., Murray, R.M., Newbury-Ecob, R., Ouwehand, W., Paunio, T., Prigmore, E., Rees, E., Roberts, D., Sambrook, J., Sklar, P., Clair, D.S., Veijola, J., Walters, J.T.R., Williams, H., Swedish Schizophrenia Study, INTERVAL Study, DDD Study, UK10 K Consortium, Sullivan, P.F., Hurles, M.E., O’Donovan, M.C., Palotie, A., Owen, M.J., Barrett, J.C., 2016. Rare loss-of-function variants in SETD1A are associated with schizophrenia and developmental disorders. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 571–577. doi:10.1038/nn.4267
17.	Traboulsee, A.L., Bernales, C.Q., Ross, J.P., Lee, J.D., Sadovnick, A.D., Vilariño-Güell, C., 2014. Genetic variants in IL2RA and IL7R affect multiple sclerosis disease risk and progression. Neurogenetics 15, 165–169. doi:10.1007/s10048-014-0403-3
18.	Walsh, R., 2016. Reassessment of Mendelian gene pathogenicity using 7,855 cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 reference samples. Genet. Med. In press. doi:doi:10.1038/gim.2016.90
19.	Wang, Z., Sadovnick, A.D., Traboulsee, A.L., Ross, J.P., Bernales, C.Q., Encarnacion, M., Yee, I.M., de Lemos, M., Greenwood, T., Lee, J.D., Wright, G., Ross, C.J., Zhang, S., Song, W., Vilariño-Güell, C., 2016. Nuclear Receptor NR1H3 in Familial Multiple Sclerosis. Neuron 90, 948–954. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.04.039
20.	Watts, J.C., Giles, K., Serban, A., Patel, S., Oehler, A., Bhardwaj, S., Guan, S., Greicius, M.D., Miller, B.L., DeArmond, S.J., Geschwind, M.D., Prusiner, S.B., 2015. Modulation of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease prion propagation by the A224V mutation. Ann. Neurol. 78, 540–553. doi:10.1002/ana.24463
21.	Weren, R.D.A., Ligtenberg, M.J.L., Kets, C.M., de Voer, R.M., Verwiel, E.T.P., Spruijt, L., van Zelst-Stams, W.A.G., Jongmans, M.C., Gilissen, C., Hehir-Kwa, J.Y., Hoischen, A., Shendure, J., Boyle, E.A., Kamping, E.J., Nagtegaal, I.D., Tops, B.B.J., Nagengast, F.M., Geurts van Kessel, A., van Krieken, J.H.J.M., Kuiper, R.P., Hoogerbrugge, N., 2015. A germline homozygous mutation in the base-excision repair gene NTHL1 causes adenomatous polyposis and colorectal cancer. Nat. Genet. 47, 668–671. doi:10.1038/ng.3287


[Wang 2016]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27253448 "Wang Z, Sadovnick AD, Traboulsee AL, Ross JP, Bernales CQ, Encarnacion M, Yee  IM, de Lemos M, Greenwood T, Lee JD, Wright G, Ross CJ, Zhang S, Song W, Vilariño-Güell C. Nuclear Receptor NR1H3 in Familial Multiple Sclerosis. Neuron.  2016 Jun 1;90(5):948-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.04.039. PubMed PMID: 27253448."

[Richards 2015]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25741868/ "Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S, Bick D, Das S, Gastier-Foster J, Grody WW, Hegde M, Lyon E, Spector E, Voelkerding K, Rehm HL; ACMG Laboratory Quality Assurance Committee. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants:  a joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and  Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet Med. 2015 May;17(5):405-24. doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.30. Epub 2015 Mar 5. PubMed PMID: 25741868; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4544753."

[MacArthur 2014]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24759409 "MacArthur DG, Manolio TA, Dimmock DP, Rehm HL, Shendure J, Abecasis GR, Adams  DR, Altman RB, Antonarakis SE, Ashley EA, Barrett JC, Biesecker LG, Conrad DF, Cooper GM, Cox NJ, Daly MJ, Gerstein MB, Goldstein DB, Hirschhorn JN, Leal SM, Pennacchio LA, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Sunyaev SR, Valle D, Voight BF, Winckler W, Gunter C. Guidelines for investigating causality of sequence variants in human disease. Nature. 2014 Apr 24;508(7497):469-76. doi: 10.1038/nature13127. PubMed PMID: 24759409; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4180223."

[Sadovnick 1998]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9706723 "Sadovnick AD, Risch NJ, Ebers GC. Canadian collaborative project on genetic susceptibility to MS, phase 2: rationale and method. Canadian Collaborative Study Group. Can J Neurol Sci. 1998 Aug;25(3):216-21. PubMed PMID: 9706723."

[Traboulsee 2014]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24770783 "Traboulsee AL, Bernales CQ, Ross JP, Lee JD, Sadovnick AD, Vilariño-Güell C. Genetic variants in IL2RA and IL7R affect multiple sclerosis disease risk and progression. Neurogenetics. 2014 Aug;15(3):165-9. doi: 10.1007/s10048-014-0403-3. Epub 2014 Apr 26. PubMed PMID: 24770783."

[Kirov 2014]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23992924 "Kirov G, Rees E, Walters JT, Escott-Price V, Georgieva L, Richards AL, Chambert KD, Davies G, Legge SE, Moran JL, McCarroll SA, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ. The penetrance of copy number variations for schizophrenia and developmental delay. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):378-85. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.07.022. Epub 2013 Aug 28. PubMed PMID: 23992924; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4229045."

[Minikel 2016]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26791950 "Minikel EV, Vallabh SM, Lek M, Estrada K, Samocha KE, Sathirapongsasuti JF, McLean CY, Tung JY, Yu LP, Gambetti P, Blevins J, Zhang S, Cohen Y, Chen W, Yamada M, Hamaguchi T, Sanjo N, Mizusawa H, Nakamura Y, Kitamoto T, Collins SJ, Boyd A, Will RG, Knight R, Ponto C, Zerr I, Kraus TF, Eigenbrod S, Giese A, Calero M, de Pedro-Cuesta J, Haïk S, Laplanche JL, Bouaziz-Amar E, Brandel JP, Capellari S, Parchi P, Poleggi A, Ladogana A, O'Donnell-Luria AH, Karczewski KJ,  Marshall JL, Boehnke M, Laakso M, Mohlke KL, Kähler A, Chambert K, McCarroll S, Sullivan PF, Hultman CM, Purcell SM, Sklar P, van der Lee SJ, Rozemuller A, Jansen C, Hofman A, Kraaij R, van Rooij JG, Ikram MA, Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn  CM; Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), Daly MJ, MacArthur DG. Quantifying prion disease penetrance using large population control cohorts. Sci Transl Med. 2016 Jan 20;8(322):322ra9. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad5169. PubMed PMID: 26791950; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4774245."

[Alonso & Hernan 2008]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18606967 "Alonso A, Hernán MA. Temporal trends in the incidence of multiple sclerosis: a systematic review. Neurology. 2008 Jul 8;71(2):129-35. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000316802.35974.34. Review. PubMed PMID: 18606967; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4109189."

[Watts 2015]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26094969 "Watts JC, Giles K, Serban A, Patel S, Oehler A, Bhardwaj S, Guan S, Greicius MD, Miller BL, DeArmond SJ, Geschwind MD, Prusiner SB. Modulation of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease prion propagation by the A224V mutation. Ann Neurol. 2015 Oct;78(4):540-53. doi: 10.1002/ana.24463. Epub 2015 Aug 25. PubMed PMID: 26094969; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4711268."

[Weren 2015]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25938944 "Weren RD, Ligtenberg MJ, Kets CM, de Voer RM, Verwiel ET, Spruijt L, van Zelst-Stams WA, Jongmans MC, Gilissen C, Hehir-Kwa JY, Hoischen A, Shendure J, Boyle EA, Kamping EJ, Nagtegaal ID, Tops BB, Nagengast FM, Geurts van Kessel A, van Krieken JH, Kuiper RP, Hoogerbrugge N. A germline homozygous mutation in the  base-excision repair gene NTHL1 causes adenomatous polyposis and colorectal cancer. Nat Genet. 2015 Jun;47(6):668-71. doi: 10.1038/ng.3287. Epub 2015 May 4.  PubMed PMID: 25938944."

[Walsh 2016]: http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/02/24/041111 "Roddy Walsh1,2,§, Kate L Thomson3,4,§, James S Ware1,2, Birgit H Funke5,6, JessicaWoodley3, Karen J McGuire3, Francesco Mazzarotto1,2, Edward Blair7, Anneke Seller3, Jenny CTaylor 8,9, Eric V Minikel10,11, Exome Aggregation Consortium12,#, Daniel G MacArthur10,11,13,Martin Farrall4,9, Stuart A Cook2,14,15,†,*, Hugh C Watkins4,9,†,* Reassessment of Mendelian gene pathogenicity using 7,855 cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 reference samples. bioRxiv / Genetics in Medicine (in press) doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/041111"

[Singh 2016]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26974950 "Singh T, Kurki MI, Curtis D, Purcell SM, Crooks L, McRae J, Suvisaari J, Chheda H, Blackwood D, Breen G, Pietiläinen O, Gerety SS, Ayub M, Blyth M, Cole T, Collier D, Coomber EL, Craddock N, Daly MJ, Danesh J, DiForti M, Foster A, Freimer NB, Geschwind D, Johnstone M, Joss S, Kirov G, Körkkö J, Kuismin O, Holmans P, Hultman CM, Iyegbe C, Lönnqvist J, Männikkö M, McCarroll SA, McGuffin  P, McIntosh AM, McQuillin A, Moilanen JS, Moore C, Murray RM, Newbury-Ecob R, Ouwehand W, Paunio T, Prigmore E, Rees E, Roberts D, Sambrook J, Sklar P, St Clair D, Veijola J, Walters JT, Williams H; Swedish Schizophrenia Study; INTERVAL Study; DDD Study; UK10 K Consortium, Sullivan PF, Hurles ME, O'Donovan MC, Palotie A, Owen MJ, Barrett JC. Rare loss-of-function variants in SETD1A are associated with schizophrenia and developmental disorders. Nat Neurosci. 2016 Apr;19(4):571-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.4267. Epub 2016 Mar 14. PubMed PMID: 26974950."

[Sadovnick 1989]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2770807 "Sadovnick AD, Paty DW, Yannakoulias G. Concurrence of multiple sclerosis and inflammatory bowel disease. N Engl J Med. 1989 Sep 14;321(11):762-3. PubMed PMID: 2770807."

[Rodan 2016]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27329733 "Rodan LH, Cohen J, Fatemi A, Gillis T, Lucente D, Gusella J, Picker JD. A novel neurodevelopmental disorder associated with compound heterozygous variants  in the huntingtin gene. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 Jun 22. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2016.74.  [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 27329733."

[Ramagopalan 2007]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17560172 "Ramagopalan SV, Dyment DA, Valdar W, Herrera BM, Criscuoli M, Yee IM, Sadovnick AD, Ebers GC; Canadian Collaborative Study Group. Autoimmune disease in families with multiple sclerosis: a population-based study. Lancet Neurol. 2007 Jul;6(7):604-10. PubMed PMID: 17560172."

[Nielsen 2008]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18573841 "Nielsen NM, Frisch M, Rostgaard K, Wohlfahrt J, Hjalgrim H, Koch-Henriksen N,  Melbye M, Westergaard T. Autoimmune diseases in patients with multiple sclerosis  and their first-degree relatives: a nationwide cohort study in Denmark. Mult Scler. 2008 Jul;14(6):823-9. doi: 10.1177/1352458508088936. Epub 2008 Jun 23. PubMed PMID: 18573841."

[Mencacci 2016]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27058447 "Mencacci NE, Kamsteeg EJ, Nakashima K, R'Bibo L, Lynch DS, Balint B, Willemsen MA, Adams ME, Wiethoff S, Suzuki K, Davies CH, Ng J, Meyer E, Veneziano L, Giunti P, Hughes D, Raymond FL, Carecchio M, Zorzi G, Nardocci N, Barzaghi C, Garavaglia B, Salpietro V, Hardy J, Pittman AM, Houlden H, Kurian MA, Kimura H, Vissers LE,  Wood NW, Bhatia KP. De Novo Mutations in PDE10A Cause Childhood-Onset Chorea with Bilateral Striatal Lesions. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Apr 7;98(4):763-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.02.015. PubMed PMID: 27058447; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4833291."

[Lander & Kruglyak 1995]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7581446 "Lander E, Kruglyak L. Genetic dissection of complex traits: guidelines for interpreting and reporting linkage results. Nat Genet. 1995 Nov;11(3):241-7. PubMed PMID: 7581446."

[Exome Aggregation Consortium 2016]: http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/10/30/030338 "Exome Aggregation Consortium, Lek, M., Karczewski, K., Minikel, E., Samocha, K., Banks, E., Fennell, T., O’Donnell-Luria, A., Ware, J., Hill, A., Cummings, B., Tukiainen, T., Birnbaum, D., Kosmicki, J., Duncan, L., Estrada, K., Zhao, F., Zou, J., Pierce-Hoffman, E., Cooper, D., DePristo, M., Do, R., Flannick, J., Fromer, M., Gauthier, L., Goldstein, J., Gupta, N., Howrigan, D., Kiezun, A., Kurki, M., Moonshine, A.L., Natarajan, P., Orozco, L., Peloso, G., Poplin, R., Rivas, M., Ruano-Rubio, V., Ruderfer, D., Shakir, K., Stenson, P., Stevens, C., Thomas, B., Tiao, G., Tusie-Luna, M., Weisburd, B., Won, H.-H., Yu, D., Altshuler, D., Ardissino, D., Boehnke, M., Danesh, J., Roberto, E., Florez, J., Gabriel, S., Getz, G., Hultman, C., Kathiresan, S., Laakso, M., McCarroll, S., McCarthy, M., McGovern, D., McPherson, R., Neale, B., Palotie, A., Purcell, S., Saleheen, D., Scharf, J., Sklar, P., Patrick, S., Tuomilehto, J., Watkins, H., Wilson, J., Daly, M., MacArthur, D., In press. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. bioRxiv / Nature (in press). doi:10.1101/030338"

[ExAC variant 11:47290147 G / A]: http://exac.broadinstitute.org/variant/11-47290147-G-A "ExAC variant 11:47290147 G / A [WWW Document], 2014. URL http://exac.broadinstitute.org/variant/11-47290147-G-A (accessed 6.30.16)."

[Cotsapas 2011]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21852963 "Cotsapas C, Voight BF, Rossin E, Lage K, Neale BM, Wallace C, Abecasis GR, Barrett JC, Behrens T, Cho J, De Jager PL, Elder JT, Graham RR, Gregersen P, Klareskog L, Siminovitch KA, van Heel DA, Wijmenga C, Worthington J, Todd JA, Hafler DA, Rich SS, Daly MJ; FOCiS Network of Consortia. Pervasive sharing of genetic effects in autoimmune disease. PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002254. Epub 2011 Aug 10. PubMed PMID: 21852963; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3154137."